The  physical release  of  Grizzards  is coming  to  the Portland  Retro
Gaming Expo.

Thanks  to AtariAge  —  with  special thanks  to  @Albert for  extensive
publication support,  and @batari for  the electronics design —  we will
have a boxed set that includes:

- the box itself, as lovely as it is,

- a 20-page manual, revised, edited, and professionally printed,

- a printed map of Syrex to help you get started in your adventuring,

- and, best  of all, the  game cartridge  which features the  ability to
  save up  to 8  players' games in  progress at a  time directly  to the
  cartridge itself.

This is otherwise quite similar to  the 64k builds that have been posted
previously to the forums, but with  an additional 2k EEPROM hooked up to
provide save game storage. This is a 64k game (66k if you count the save
game space!) and does not make use of an ARM (or any other) coprocessor.

Hardware Support:

 * The game is available for each  of the three Atari 2600 TV standards.
   The NTSC  and PAL versions  are quite  similar, except for  color and
   frame rate changes. The SECAM version  is not just the PAL version in
   Black & White mode, though: it has been specially designed with SECAM
   players in mind, featuring colors  specifically chosen to display "as
   well  as possible"  on the  SECAM 2600,  while also  using the  Right
   Difficulty  Switch  (rather  than   the  Color/B&W  switch)  for  the
   pause function.

 * The  game  also  makes  extensive  use  of  AtariVox,  with  complete
   narration of all  NPC encounters, all combat actions,  and many other
   game events.

 * You  can  play  perfectly  well enough  with  a  standard  one-button
   joystick,  like  the trusty  CX-40,  or  any compatible  replacement.
   You can also use a  SEGA Genesis/MegaDrive controller as a two-button
   input (button "C" brings up your  stats screen, making the game Couch
   Compliant™), or a Joy2b+ controller  for a three-button input (button
   "II" for stats, and button "III" to pause the game).

As you may be aware, Grizzards has:

 * 30  Grizzard companions  to either  catch or  metamorphose, including
   your choice of one of three Starter Grizzards to begin the game.

 * Two difficulty levels, Normal, and Expert (Left Difficulty Switch)
 
 * A New Game Plus mode that is  more difficult, but allows you to start
   over with your  Grizzards team and also pick up  the two Starters you
   did not choose originally.

 * Over 200  rooms to  explore (201,  actually, in  the main  game, plus
   a couple of secret bonus rooms)

 * Over  30 non-player  characters to  meet  and perhaps  save from  the
   monsters

 * Over  80 kinds  of  monsters, including  "normal"  monsters (who  may
   travel in parties) and bigger, stronger "boss" variants.

 * A total of 64 different combat  Moves from which to choose, including
   healing and buffing Moves for  your Grizzards to use upon themselves,
   and attack moves  to use against the enemies. Learn  new moves either
   by watching enemies use them, or by gaining experience.

 * Combat experience  may raise your  Attack or Defend  ability, Maximum
   Hit  Points,  or  even  cause  your  Grizzard  to  metamorphose  into
   a new form.

 * There are  four main music tracks  in the game, and  when played with
   the AtariVox, there are over  300 unique speech utterances drawn from
   a dictionary of around 2,000 words.

If you'll  be at PRGE,  Grizzards will also be  on demo at  the AtariAge
booth, so you  can experience it yourself.  I will also be  at the show,
along with  my partner Zephyr  Salz who  created the original  music and
printed art work, including the label/box/manual cover.

