GRIZZARDS: A Turn-Based Role-Playing Game for the Atari 2600

The land of Syrex is a dangerous place. Fierce monsters roam the
countryside. But luckily for you, you're a Grizzard handler! Train your
Grizzard to use a variety of Moves to take on the monsters. Discover new
kinds of Grizzards with new capabilities. Can you conquer all the
monsters of Syrex? In this game you'll explore Syrex on over 200
screens; catch, train, and metamorphose unique Grizzard companions; talk
to and help out over 30 different non-player characters; and fight over
80 kinds of monsters.

Explore the game world, starting in your destroyed home of Treble
Village. Avoid the dangerous Fire Bogs until you've trained your
Grizzard some new moves and gained stronger Attack and Defend abilities.
Choose your battles, catch new Grizzards, and return to a Grizzard Depot
(purple building) to heal, save your progress, and switch between your
Grizzard companions. Discover who's behind the influx of monsters, and
battle your way to the end boss, then continue in New Game Plus mode
where you can try to acquire all 30 Grizzards for ultimate mastery.

Press the joystick to walk around the map; B button for potions; or walk
into people, signs, monsters, doors, or Grizzard Depots to interact with
them. In combat, Joystick left/right selects a target, up/down selects
a Move, B to take action. Game Select or C button to review your current
stats. To heal, use Potions on the map, healing Moves in combat, or
visit a Grizzard Depot. Left Difficulty Switch: "B" for Normal, "A" for
Expert. Color/B&W switch pauses the game on the map screen.




HARDWARE

Supports: Atari 2600 compatible one-button joysticks or game pads; SEGA
Genesis 3-button controllers (using only buttons "B" and "C"); or Joy2b+
3-button controllers (button I=action, II=stats, III=pause).

AtariVox optional.

Save-to-cartridge memory has 8 slots for simultaneous play.

Game ROM is 64kiB (+ 2kiB EEPROM).


OPERATOR NOTES

To erase a game slot, set both Difficulty Switches to "A", then go to
SELECT SLOT screen, left/right to select the slot, then pull down on the
joystick, and while holding down, press the B button and hold it while
moving the joystick forward. Same steps to un-erase. (Reset Left
Difficulty to "B" afterwards for Normal play mode.)

